Ricardian Trade Model:
	Don't be autocratic
		Trade is the better way
	Maximum Utility between supplier and consumers is at the tangency point between the highest indifference curve and the possibility frontier
	Consumer willingness to pay for a good is represented by the slope of the indifference curve and is called the marginal rate of substitution
	MRS=MU1/MU2 MUi being the marginal utility of good indifference
	the consumption point that is best is where MRS=MRT/marginal rate of substitution = marginal rate of transformation = aL1/Al2=MU1/MU2
	
	Open Economy
		In an open economy, the same two goods from above are each either produced by one or both of the countries involved. the only constraint is that the total value of consumption is equal to total production
		P*1x1+p*2x2=p*1y1+p*2y2(expenditure=income
		Under Equilibrium, MRS = p*1/p*2x2
		

The Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Model
	Ricardian was good until WWII started
	now the Heckscher-Ohlin Is a better model
	an even better one is the Heckscher-ohlin-Vanek Theorem The theory is based off of the assumption that all countries have identical production technologies
	2 countires (america and Brittain)
	2 commodidies (wine and cheese)
	2 factors (labor and capital)
	4 major components:
		1. Factor Price Equilization
			8 assumptions
				1. No artificial trade barriers
				2. No transportation cost
				3. Perfect Competition + Full Employement
				4. Factors are mobile in each country but are immobile across national borders
				5. No specialization (each country produces at least a little bit of each good)
				6. Constant returns to scale on production, but different slopes between different industries
				7. Both countries have identical technologies
				8. No factor intensity reversal
			Given those assumptions, factor prices will equalize between countries w=w*, r=r*
			
				
		2. Stolper-Samuelson Theorem
			Links commodity and factor prices
			it assumes that in the long run, with free trade and perfect competition, profits will be zero in every industry price will equal the sum of inputs for each product
			An increase in the price of the capital intensive good increases return to capital and decreases the return to labor in vice versa
			Magnification effect: an increase in the price of a capital intensive good increases the return to capital more than proportionately. 
		3. Rybczynski Theorem
			assumptions: output prices held constant and factor prices are fixed. 
			input-output coefficients remain constant. 
			an increase in labor endowment increases the output of the labor-intensive industry and decreases the output of the other industry
		4. Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theorem
		once the above assumptions are met, each country exports the commodity that intensively uses its abundant factor. 
		
		Leontief Paradox:
			Professor Leontief reached a paradoxical conclusion that the United States in 1953 exported labor intensive stuff and imported capital intensive stuff. 
			this could have been due to the wartime economy. this can also be caused when production of one commodity is labor-intensive in one country but capital-intensive in another. (Factor intensity reversal)the paradox could also have been caused by tariffs and transport costs or any number of things
	
Empirical tests

Protectionism
	Tariffs and quotas are mathematically the same
		Look at charts to figure this out
	arguments for protectionism:
		fallacy of composition
			What's good for our industry is good for the whole country
		Keep money at home argument
			falls apart because anyone who says it doesn't understand that money is only useful where it can be spent eg. the home country, so it will need to be used back at home anyway
		Home market argument
			"domestic producers should have a home market for their products. by elimination foreign imports, more jobs can be created"
			said only by people who don't understand how comparitive advantage works
		Equalization of costs argument
			"hey fuckers, let's just destroy the reason for trade by making the price of foreign goods the same as home goods with tarrifs and shit"
				fuck off with that shitty logic
		National Security Argument
			"a nation dependent on foreign sources of supply is vulnerable in a war"
				falls apart when you realize we aren't doing any wars also, the only things that really need to be controlled are the exports of things that are actually useful for waging war
		Infant Industry Argument:
			"a new industry having a potential comparative advantage may not get started in a country unless it is given temporary protection against foreign competition."
				protection will tend to last far too long. also, it will probably not be needed if the new product is actually useful enough. 
		Antidumping argument
			"some fireign firms prey on domestic producers by cutting prices to put a competing industry out of business and to raisse prices after"
				this is actually not super cool, but the protectionistic policies should only show up when the issues occur. 
				it's difficult for government to distingusih permanent(good) and predatory dumping
		Reciprocity Argument
			"The us Market is more open to imports than foreign markets. We need equal access to foreign markets"
				Bad because domestic protection will lead to retaliation by the foreign state
		optimal tariff:
			"the optimal tariff maximizes welfare of a large trading country which acts like a monopoly in trade. it is based on the naive assumption that trading partners do not retaliate. the argument is that a large country can gain from a tariff if its trading partners do not retaliate"

Factor Markets

Multinational Corporations
	3 stages of evolution
		1. Initial inquiries=> result in first export
		2. Initially, firms rely on export agents => expansion of export sales
		3. =>foreign sales branch or assembly operations are established(to save on transportation)
			Why do that?
				limits to foreign exports due to tariffs, quotas, and transportation costs
				Possible lower wage rates
				laxer regulations
				better ability to meet consumer demands
				save on taxes
		Motives for foreign direct investment:
			1. Growth Motive
			2. Bypass protection in importing countries
			3. Avoid high Corporate Tax
			4. Avoid high transportation costs
			5. Avoid Exchange Rate Fluctuations
			6. reduce competition(by buying them)
			7. Secure essential inputs
			8. Cheap labor
	International Joint Ventures
		they happen when a business or organization is established by two or more companies that combine skills and assets
			Types
				1. 2 businesses coming together
				2. a business and a local business
				3. a busines and a local government
			Why do it?
				1. Large capital costs
				2. protection-- no import/export protections
		yo taxes fam. They might be double charged n shit
		transfer prices are also ta thing......
Economic Integration
	stages of economic integration
	0.0	autarky
	0.1 preferential trade agreements
		lower tariffs among member countries
	1. free trade agreenment
		a group of countries don't have any restrictions on trade within the area, but each member country keeps its own tariff and quota system with third countries
	2. customs union
		when a group of countries remove all restrictions on mutual trade, and establish a uniform system of tariffs and quotas with respect to third countries
	3. common market
		remove all restrictions on movement of factors of labor and capital. also establish the same currency
	4. Economic Union
		single currency, central bank, unified fiscal authority. at that point make it one government and you have a perfect system (USA USA USA USA USA USA USA)
Other Cusoms Unions
	European Union:
		1. European Commission
			Has the executive power of the EU
			the council appoints commissioners
			27 Commissioners plus the president
			initiates proposals for legislation with 3 interests
				European Interest-good for the union as whole
				Consultation-conslt as widely as necessary
				Subsidiary-The union takes action if it becomes more effective than if left to individual member states
		2. Council of Ministers
			not the european council
			made up of heads of states, it's president, and the president of the european commission
			make laws of the following forms
				regulations directly applied with no international measures
				directives that bind member states to the objectives but permit national authorities to choose the form and means
				decisions binding to those who are addressed
				and recommendations that are nonbinding 
		3. European Parliament
			THey approve the union's budget, though it was originally supposed to have only a consulting role. leislative power is split with the council
		4. Court of Justice
			Started as a court regarding union laws
			28 udges wit 6 year terms who elec the president of the court.
			they interpret treatites and things of that nature
General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade
	GATT was established shortly after WWII
		They made the IMF (international monetary fund) to facilitate international payments
		they made the international bank for reconstruction and development
		GATT was established in 1947 to make the ITO(international trade organization) to regulate world trade.
		as a political complement, they established the UN
		
			World GOvernments
				WTO/GATT regulates trade and investment
				IMF regulates currency practices
				IBRD(world bank) Allocates capital to developing countries
				National governments have diplomatic rights
				UN oversees international peace and war as well as territorial disputes
				INternaitonal court of justice-part of the UN
				WIPO (world intellectual property organization)deals with copyrights, trademarks, and things of that nature. 
	Obligates each country to accort nondiscriminative, most favored nation treatment to all other contracting parties with respect to tariffs.
	The most favored nation treatment doesn't mean free trade or national treatments. Imports can still have tarrifs or quotas but no countries recieve better treatment or lower tariffs save for a few exceptions
		Exceptions
			Existing tariff preferences like those in the Commonwealth of brittain
			Gatt/WTO customs union formation
			An excape clause that allows a party to leave or modify tariff concessions if it threatens injury to domestic producers
	Prohibits use of quantitative restrictions on exports and imports. 

World Trade Organizaion
	The WTO is a legal and institutional foundation of the multilateral trading system. that allows regulation on international trade. It came about in 1995. 
	acts as a forum for multilateral trade negotiations
	seeks to resolve trade disputes
	oversees national trade policiescooperates with other international institutions involved in global economic policy making
	has provisions for resolving disputes unlike the Gatt
		there's a lot of stuff about the WTO fam
NAFTA

Developing Countries
	Developing countries are reliant on developed economies. 
	usually their exports are primary products
	they face massive consequences due to instability
	ways of making prices more stable
		Production and export control
		setting price floors and ceilings
		Buffer stock
			government buys up when price is cheap and sells when it's expensive to help even out the supplies
		Deficiency Payment Programs
			The government pays producers directly to make up for price changes
Foreign Exchange Markets
	Participants in exchange markets
		1. Foreign Exchange Dealers (mostly large banks)
		2. Forign Exchange brokers ( for retail customers)
		3. Central Banks
			They shouldn't do much of it at all. they only intervene to prevent or effect currency value changes
Balance of Payments
	Flexible exchange rates
		When rates aren't stabilized, the rates resemble closely a theoretical model of perfect competition.-all sellers and buyers are price takers. 
		supply being debit transactions as payments by domestic residents to foreign residents
		demand being the credit transactions as payments by forign residents to domestic residents. 
	Fixed Exchange Rates
		governments can declare a fixed level and a band of prices within which the exchange rates are allowed to vary
		Hard Peg
			A government ahs a permanantly fixed rate with a currency
		adjustable peg
			rates are periodically adjusted(bretton woods)
		soft peg
			day-to-day to quarter-to-quarter pegging
		exchange control through foreign exchange rationing
		wide band where rates are fixed with a considerable amount of allowe fluctuation
		crawling peg- it has to stay within a level x percent within the average of y weeks
		Currency baskets
			A nation pegs its currency to a basket of currencies
		Dollarization-
			using the currency of another nation and giving up
Organizing balance of payment accounts
	Definitions
		merchandise balance= Merchandise exports-merchandise imports
		services=tranportation, insurance, travel, investment services, royalties, and other services.
		Unilateral transfers= gifts
		private transfers=expendetures for charitable organizations
	Capital account record the changes in a country's international financial assets and liabilities. 
		Capital inflow occurs when residents' financial liabilities increse (selling bonds to foreigners)
		Direct Investment is a long term capital outflow
			includes foreign brances+subsidiaries
		Portfolio investments are where the investor doesn't have effective control over investments and covers transactions with maturity of more than one year. 
		Short term capital flows= international transfers with maturity of one year or less. 
	Official Reserve account records transactions of the central bank when it buys or sells foreign currencies
		delays changes in exchange rates
		counters disorderly conditions in the Forex market
		
	Goods and Service Balance= exports of services-imports of services
	current account balance= exports-imports-Taxes
	Basic Balance = current account balance - Long Term Capital Outflow. 
		measures structural changes in a country's balance of payments
	Liquidity balance = basic balance - Short term capital outflow
	Official Reserve Transactions Balance
		equal to basic balance - short term capital outflow of private sector
Macroeconomic policies
	Classic model
		assumes prices and wages are flexible. 
			there will be no unemployment as wage rates will just fall until everyone is employed. 
	Keynesian and General Models
		it is more reasonable to use the keynesian model post Great Depression. 
		it assumes prices and wages are inflexible, but sticky downwards and that unemployment exists. 
	THe model
		Y=C+I+G+(X-M)
		National income = consumption+investment+ Government Purchases+ (exports-Imports)
		C=C(Y),C'=0
		I=I^o
		G = g^o
		Y=C+S+T(S is saving)
		When people save their money, it fucks up the whole model
		equilibrium occurs when I+G+X=S+T+M(investments+government spending+exports=Savings+taxes+imports)
		with no government I+X=S+M (investments+exports=savings+imports)
		the paradox of saving is that when people save money autonomously in an open economy, their saving prevents consumption, which prevents gross output, which will de-value the savings leading to a net decrease in aggregate savings. 
	General market of an Open Economy	
		The domestic economy has 3 markets
			product
			money
			external
		Product Market equilibrium requires
			Y=C(Y)+I(r)+G+(X-M)
			
			if this is confusing, go to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_savings and look that shit up. 
			
			marginal propencity to consume is the change in consumption/the change in disposable income
			marginal propencity to consume is .77 in america.
			every marginal 1 dollar in disposable income above leads to people saving 23 cents. 
			
			this whole part is confusing http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/classes/econ355/choi/mac.htm
			have fun^^^^^^^^^
		Open Economy
			small country
				Y=a+bY+I+X-mY
				Y=(a+I+X)/(1-b+m)
				
			Forign trade multiplier is a thing. it is larger for a large country is greater than that for a small country.
				
		Just fuck me up fam-->    https://mises.org/system/tdf/International%20Trade%20and%20the%20National%20Income%20Multiplier_4.pdf?file=1&type=document
		
		General model of the Closed Economy
			Equilibrium(with unemployment)
				Y=C(Y)+I(r)+G
				When aggregate demand is equal to the current output, actual inventories are exactly equal to the planned inventories. 
				this yields the IS curve which isa locus of income and interest rate. 
				The is curve is negative sloped. increasing R lowers investment which reduces GDP thorough the multiplier.
		Money Market
			Real money supply
				Money supply speculative+transactions+precautionary demand
				Transactions demand is k(Y+) and is proportional to demand. 
				speculative demand is inversely related to interest rate L(r-)
				Two components (nominal) money demand=L(r-)+kPY
				(real) Money Demand = l(r-) +kY,K>0
				M^s/P=l(r-)+kY
				LM curve is positively sloped. 
				
				Rightward Shifts
					M increases
					P deceases. 
				
Internal and External Balance
	Monetary policy is changing the interest rate ind influencing the monetary supply
	fiscal policy is changing the tax rates and levels of government spending to influence aggregate demand in the economy. 
	
	balances externally, there will probably be unemployement
	
Effectiveness of Monetary and Fiscal Policies
	I can't find anything on this... good luck with that shit. 
Gold Standard
	money used to be just based on gold and nothing else. 
	When gold was being made, expansion was able to occur. 
	otherwise, it didn't.
	During the gold standard, prices wre stable, so little gold moved between countries. Countries adjusted the interest rates to keep gold from moving as much as possible. 
		Problems
			Gold standard is deflationairy. 
			Economic growth is constrained by the gold supply.
			THere is no ability to control the money supply.
			there is no way to insulate the domestic economy from external shocks such as discovering large amounts of gold. 
	The usa went away from the gold standard between 1919and 1925 due to fluctuating exchange rates. 
	after 1925, we went back to it. 
	US and Great Brittain were to hold only gold as a reserve asset. 
	the dollar and pound were to be used as reserve assets for other countries. 
	The dollar and pound were free to be converted to gold by central banks, but not for the general public. 
	in September 1931, brittain suspended gold payments
	in april 1933, Roosevelt suspended the gold standard. 
Bretton Woods System
	The Bretton Woods system was based on stable and adjustable exchange rates. The occasional dealuations of individual currencies were allowed to correct fundamental disequilibria in the balance of payments(BP)
	By signing on to it, countries were submitting their exchange rates to international disciplines. 
	The adjustable peg was seen as an improvement over the gold exchange standard. 
	Currencies could be made to gold, but countries had the ability to change par values of currencies.
		unanticipated problems
		1. Over time, the world eocnomy grew and needed liquidity or reserve assets
		2. Given the fixed quantity of gold, countries started holding the US dollar and gold as reserve. 
		3. due to the growing economy of the world, demand for the dollar as a reserve assset meant the US was facing increasing trade deficets
		4. Other countries could devalue, but the US couldn't devalue. 
	they made the IMF after WWII and countries agreed to the following
		submit a par value compared to gold
		allow changes in the par value
		allow their currency to be declared scarce
		forbid restrictions on current account balances
		retain exchange control restictions in effect when the country entered the fund
	how a country financed trade deficits
		The IMF helped them out
	Reserve(gold)Tranche: 25% of quota was paid to the fund in gold
	credit tranche: 75% of the quota was paid in the currency's own currency. 
		the more each country held in tranche, the more power they had in the IMF and the more borrowin they could do. 
	
	Ways to correct balance of payment deficits
		1. Deflate the economy(permanent but painful)
			Use contractionary monetary policy(raise interest rates) or fiscal policy(cut federal spending)
		2. Devalue own currency(permanent and effective under fixed exchange rates)
		3. impose exchange control on current account(a temporary stopgap solution)
		4. Deplete Gold stock(it will run out eventually)
		5. increase liabilities to foreign central banks.(only speculators will gain)
	US payment deficits in the 1960s
		there was outflow of mad money fam through
			a. higher return on foreign investments
			b. military commitments in Europe and Asian
			c. Vietnam War
		Nixon got us completely off the gold standard to this stuff in 1971
			90 day freeze on wages and prices
			10%import surcharge on dutiable imports
			suspention of dollar's convertability into gold
	
Contemporary Monetary System
	read choi's notes ya damn self. i don't give a shit anymore. 