#ARCH 221
History of Pre-Modern Architecture
Jelena Bogdanovic
office: 579 Design
Office hours Monday 1:00 - 2:00 and by appointment
phone: 515-294-8739--she doesn't use it. 
email: jelenab@iastate.edu
TAs: dldndgm@iastate.edu, chad1@iastate.edu
textbook: Richard Ingersoll World Architecture a Cross Cultural History 9780190646455
Textbook can also be found in the design reading room if reserved.


textbook 2: Andrew Ballanyte Key Buildings from prehistory to the present: Plans, Sections and elevations 9781856698375
cool architectural drawings book ^

Requirements:
show up, however, there is no attendance taken. 
read the stuff before each lecture
Weekly Quizzes save for thanksgiving
3 mid term exams
Final
one of the exams is dropped from the grade. 

standard grading scale 90% = A-
no curve. 

---------------
CONTENT
---------------
Prehistoric Architecture as a second nature... caves and huts
The difference between building and architecture: thought and design

see Lecture 2 slide 1: 
	The adobe building is good design and functional architecture for quite a few reasons. 	
		Built sustainably into the mountain with the overhang and the back wall. 
		Has windows, walls, changing levels and other useful design elements
		Built from adobe
			has good insulating properties.
Prehistoric architecture is all based on what's still around. 
Writing didn't really exist until 3500 BCE
there was proto-writing around 6000 BCE
No year 0 btw the years start at 1 CE

The periods of prehistory are subdivided by the tools used (see Lecture 2 handout)


Lecture 3:

Stone age architecture.
neolithic sites 8000 BCE
Looking at the settlement lepenski vir, near the River Danube 6000BCE
	Take note of how they use the geography to inform how they do their arcitecture. 
	they made the huts based on specific geometry with measured dimensions. 
	The huts were made of stone and wood and things. 
	Village for fishermen. 
	They also had creepy looking sad sculptures about 1 foot tall
3000 BCE
	Skara Brae, Scotland
	Relatively smaller settelment
	look at the beds and the shelves on the back
Monumental architecture can define a space. 
	Carnac, Brittany, France
	big ass stones to provide ceremonial pathways and mark the space. 
	they were built with ropes and pulley systems
	look like how we do ceremonial spaces today. without fully enclosing things. funerary architecture
	Big stones are arranged to make tombs for the dead
	Dolmen. 
New grange Dublin Ireland 3200 BCE
	landscape architecture and architecture working together. 
	big earth work. lots of stuff underground.
	built from stone tombs. 
Lecture 4:
Ancient near east and cities of mesopotamia
	Everything is along the water. 
	writing using pointy things 
	economic develpment and some leisure time. 
	Mathematics, astronomy
Sumerian Architecture
	Temples
		Wood is very rare that part of the world. It is used for the most precious stuff in the temple like the god statue
	uruk 

	White temple and ziggurat ANU
		whitewashed to reflect the sun, stand out from the background, and to ensure the longevity of the structure. 
Ancient architecture in anatolia, levant and persia
	Hittites
		Very authoritarian and orgainzed military society
			you can tell from their art having uniform military people all over
		Hattusha-- capital city
			Stronghold for their country
			Lion's gate-- double gate with lion sculptures guarding for defensive purposes
			the citadel is teh best protected part of the city. Near the middle
			Yerkapi-- another part of the citadel: thye used a lot of earth work to do it. 
				great tunnels underground. 
				lead you directly to the top
			temples
				they were somewhat standardized in their design
				one great temple in the lower city as opposed ot the rest in the upper area of the city
				each temple has one cella except for the great temple which has two
			yazilikaya
				open air sanctuary
					just outside fo the city
	assyria
		military culture boiis that show up in the bible sometimes
		cool sculptures
			bird headed person caarving
			human headed winged lion
				with 5 legs
					from the front it looks like its standing
					froom the side it looks like it's walking away from you

