Pulic speaking 

Ancient origins
	Study of speech: rooted in the discipline of rhetoric
	one of the ancient liberal arts
	Aristotle "Rhetoric is the art of observing and using hte available means of persuasion"
	Quintilian "A great public speaker is a good person speaking well"
	A ood public speaker:
		is attuned to the full process of speech delivery
Rise in America 19th Century
	a bunch of elocution-- movement
		local history-- billy sunday
	Travelers would go around teaching people how to do elocution
	a good public speaker is
		theatrical, performative, and emotive
today:
	do it ethically and with the correct process, but also have clear delivery and a moderate amount of elocution

if you have problems: not me haha
	pinpoint your anxiety
	build confidence
		prepare and practice
		visualizing success

Each speech beginning, middle, end

Beginning
starts with an attention getter
	Contextually and tonally match the content of your speech
Goes to a thesis statement
	A single declarative statement that encapsulates the meaning of the speech. 
Preview
	Tell the audience what you will tell the audience about. 
	DO not "today i'm going to talk to you about" "in my speech I will talk to you about"
	exactly 2 points in the preview for first speech
	for the rest of the class between 2 and 5 points
	"Don't half ass two things. Whole ass one thing" ~ Ron Swanson
Body
	Elaborate on the points stated in the preview
Conclusion
	Tell the audience what you've just told them
	reiterate the thesis statement exactly
	Send the audience off with a final statement
Orange Juice

Understanding your 
"rhetorical Situation"
Occasion(exigence?(problem or situation that drives you to talk) Setting?)
Audience(Who? Demographics?)a
Speaker(Purpose? Credibility?)
Speech

Purpose
	To Inform
		provide with new information. not to convince anyone of anything
		Goal: Teach your audience something new
		Requirements for informative speech
			4-6 minutes
			4 credible sources
			well organized speech
			Extemporaneous delivery
			Effective visual aid
			inform about something or inform us of how to do something
	To Persuade
		
	To mark a special occasion

How to make a speech 
1. Select a topic
2. Get a general purpose
3. Create specific purposes

Outlining a speech
Full-sentence Outline
	most controversial thing about the class-- you aren't allowed to wing it.

Why outline the speech?
Helps you organize your thoughts
Increases message clarity
aids listener engagement and recall

arrangement
	main point->body points-> conclusin

Patterns of organization
	chronological
		do it according to time 1,2,3
	Spatial
		do it according to physical location
	Cause-Effect
		what happens followed by what that causes
	topical
		do it based on different topics


Thesis statement
	Pick a type of claim
		1. Policy (something should be done)
		2. Value (something is good/bad)
		3. Fact (something is true)
	Make sure it is an actual statement and not "here I'm going to tell you"

Facts
	Verifiable truths
	Statistics: number facts Facts or mesasurements about a large group
		Don't Cherry-Pick
Testimony
	The sharing of an individual's viewpoint, perspectives, or opinions
		expert--someone who is an expert
		Lay--someone
		Personal--you
Examples
	Descriptive illustrations of a claim
Stories
	extended examples with a beginning, middle, and end
How do you choose your supporting materials?
	Use contextual reasoning

	Rhetoric is the art of observing and using the available means of persuasian ~ aristotle
Example:"a whisper of aids" 
**see mary fisher speech from 1992 republican national convention**



