MEMOS: the perfect memo

Memo
Date:	$date
To:	$who it's for
From:	$Who it's from
Subj.:	$what it's about

a short bit about what it's about. like a sentence or so

the actual memo comes below

Lists in a memo
Start off with a sentence describing the list:

	-put the items in there
	-and so forth

put in citactions in line (likethis, 2018)

positive goodwill foreward looking closure


Why use a memo?

Primary purpose:	to inform people about what's going on
secondary purpose:	Make yourself look good

apa format: (Author, Year)<--Citation
		Documentation(in it's own section)



What is You attitude?

It allows you to be a better writer

talk about the audience not yourself
refer to audiences request or order
don't talk about feelings

Use inclusive we. If we doesn't include the audience, it will alienate
In negative situations, avoid "you"

Audiences may not understand why a message has arrived or what it means to them. 
Tell how message affects the audience
don't mention communicators work or generosity
stress what the audience wants to know

focus on what the readers can do, get or what they are recieving. 

Examples:
in positive situations use "you"
bad
We now give you 20% back on purchases
good
you can now get 20% back on purchases

Refer to detailed specifics

don't talk about feelings except to congradulate or offer

dont: I'd be happy to answer any questions you might have
better: You may direct any questions to me at the following email address...
Best: Leave it out. Anticipate questions you'll get

beyond the sentence level

Content
	be compelte
	anticipate and answer reader questions
	explain information the reader didnt' ask for
	show how the subject affects the reader

Organization
	Place information first that te reader is most interested
	arrange information to meet our audience's needs, not our own
	Use headings and lists so readers can find information easily
Key: Make a useful document

Negatives: are they ever necessary?
	Sometimes negatives must be emphasized
Positive emphasis: most of the time
How to create positive emphasis:
	Avoid negative words/words with negative connotations
	beware of hidden negatives
	focus on what the audience cna do rather than on liitations
	justify negative information
	Bury it with solutions and explanations
	avoid negative words/words with negative connotations
	avoid double negaitves
make negative news sound like good news
place reason before negative information
equation to bury the negative
Reason+Negative+Alternative/Compromise/Benifit

make the negative short
say the negaitve only once
place it in the middle of a paragraph
do not put it in a bullet or numbered list
provide an alternative, compromise, and/or reader benefit if available

Why use positive emphasis?
We use positive emphasis as a primary tool for building goodwill

Understanding your 
"rhetorical Situation"
Occasion(exigence?(problem or situation that drives you to talk) Setting?)
Audience(Who? Demographics?)a
Speaker(Purpose? Credibility?)
Speech

Purpose
	To Inform
		provide with new information. not to convince anyone of anything
		Goal: Teach your audience something new
		Requirements for informative speech
			4-6 minutes
			4 credible sources
			well organized speech
			Extemporaneous delivery
			Effective visual aid
			inform about something or inform us of how to do something
	To Persuade
		
	To mark a special occasion

How to make a speech 
1. Select a topic
2. Get a general purpose
3. Create specific purposes

Outlining a speech
Full-sentence Outline
	most controversial thing about the class-- you aren't allowed to wing it.

Why outline the speech?
Helps you organize your thoughts
Increases message clarity
aids listener engagement and recall

arrangement
	main point->body points-> conclusin

Patterns of organization
	chronological
		do it according to time 1,2,3
	Spatial
		do it according to physical location
	Cause-Effect
		what happens followed by what that causes
	topical
		do it based on different topics

