#ECON480
Environmental something or another economics
Professor: Dave Keiser
email: dkeiser@iastate.edu
phone: 515-294-1336
Office: 460F Heady Hall
office Hours: Wednesday 10:30am-12:30pm
TA: Xibo Wan
email: xwan@iastate.edu
office: 560 C, Heady Hall
Office Hours: 12:00pm to 2:00pm Thursday

Grading
homework:	25%
Test 1:		20%
Test 2:		25%
Test 3:		30%

Scale 93-90%%	A-

Book Environmental and Natural Resource Economics Tetenberg? and Lewis

Dates: 
Tuesday Sept. 18 	Test 1
Tuesday Oct. 23		Test 2
????????????????	final exam

Have the assignments printed before class starts or turn them into the Xibo at his box in Heady

#Check the slides. I'm only putting in supplemental information
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Week 1
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter 2 (see slides)

We look at markets and they tell us exactly what things are worth very well. 
The market is bad at telling the value of the environment as an asset. 

Economists like to go for efficiency. 
Efficiency is a normative statement: how the world should be

positive is a claim about how the world is and can e tested.
Efficiency: maximize producer surplus and consumer surplus

Conditions of goods that help achieve efficient quantities and prices:
	Exclusivity
	tansferability
	enforceability
Externalities:
negative externalities mean that we are producing too much and the price is too low. 

sum demand functions vertically for public goods
sum demand functions horizontally for private goods

public goods are about fixed quanitites, but the prices vary per person

Evaluating tradeoffs and benefit-cost-analysis
	benefit-cost analysis
		if benefits are greaer than costs, take action
		passing a benefit-cost test does not imply optimality

	net benefits and static efficicency
		up to this point, we've assumed time isn't imortant
		many cases where time is important
			exhaustible resources
			renewable resources
			stock pollutants (persist and accumulate over time)
		how do we make choices when benefits and costs occur at different points in time following from some action today?
	present value
	dynamic efficiency
	regulatory context
	risk and CBA
	cost-effectiveness
Present value calculations
	it's the same equation we've had in every 200+ finance/econ course
	pv(x) = X/(1+r)^t
Total value = Use Value + Option Value + Non-Use Value
	use: value of directly using it
	option: value of having it to consume later
	non-use: value of its existence without ever using it
The hedonic price approach
	the level of environmental quality can be considered a qualitative characteristic of a differentiated market good
	individuals have some freedom to choose thier consumption
		through their selection of a private consumption bundle
	assumes complementarity b/w the public good and the market good
	The market for the differentiated privae good functions as a market for the public good or enviornmental quality
	where choises are possible, people dont think it be like it is, but it do. 
Dynamic efficiency and sustainable development
	2 period model
		If resources aren't scarce, then static efficiency model is sufficient
		if resources are scarce, you need ot see how allocation does NPV over time
		Asusmptions:
			fixed supply of certain depletable resource
			consider two time periods only
			demand is constant:
				p=i-0.4q
				mc = $2
		Results:
			you would operate at p = mc for both periods if you could, but if you use up too much, you can only do it in the first period.
		Dynamic Efficiency: rule of thum
			allocation that maximizes net PV will be such that hte present value of marginal net benefits are qual across time periods
			If the marginal value you place on having a little more resource today is higher than having a little more tomorow, then consume more today.
			If the marginal value you place on having a little more resource tomrorrow is higher than having more today then consume more tomorrow. 

		Difference between what you would have payed and what the marginal cost is the marginal user cost. 
		MUC_t+1 = MUCt * (1+r)
		marginal user cost is opportunity cost with scarcity
	
		yo fam. let's get rid of the marginal user cost. 
New chapter:
Classifying pollutants
	temporal dimension
		stock pollutant -pollutnat that accumulates in the environment
		flow pollutant - pollutant that dissipates quickly in the environment
	spacial dimension
		local pollutant - pollutant where damages are tied to where they are emitted
		global pollutant - pollutant where damages are not tied to where they are emitted.

Abatement vs pollution
	abatement is control of pollution
	pollution is the emission of pollution
	
	abatement framework
	Objective: maximize the netbenefits of abatement
	max NB=Benefits(abatement)-Costs(abatement)
	First order condition-> MB(A)=MC(A)
	
	pollution framework
	objective: minimize the totl costs of pollution to society
	minimize X where TC=TotalDamages(x)+TotalAbatementCosts(x)
	FOC: MD(X)=MAC(X)

Air pollution
	efficiency vs cost-effectiveness
	efficient level of pollution
		maximizes net benefits of abatement
		minimizes total costs of pollution
	cost-effectiveness
		minimizes abatement costs subject to some constraint on pollution

Command and control approach
	one approach to polution controll
	dictate the control of pollution through technology standards or individual emissions standards
		1. do it witch technology
			specify certain abatement technology
			draw it with an isoquant
				how uch capitol and labor is needed to produce quantity of abatement?
				put labor on the y axis and capitol on the x axis
				basically you can use labor or capitol to cause abatement. 
				the government says "use this technology" which will lock you into acertain level on the isoquant

				total cost of abatement = wL( wage rate * labor )+ rK(rental rate * kapitol)
				L= totalcost/wage - (r/wage)*K
			specify certain quantity of allowed pollution
Mrket based instruments
	quantity instruments(Cap 7 Trade)
		cap the total amount of pollution and allow firms to trade
		cost-effective instrument
		efficiency depends on cap
	price instrument (tax on pollution)
		tax pollution per unit produced
		cost-effective
		efficiency depends on level of ta.

	Clean air act
		passed in 1970, revised in 1977 and 1990
		Regulates air pollution from stationary and mobile sources
		authorized EPA to establish National Ambient Air Quality Standards
		technology standards for stationary sources
efficient level is the level that maximizes the net benefits of abatement or minimize the total costs of polluiton

miniimize the sum of abatement costs as a function of emmissions + the sum from i=1 to n of the damages attributable for every firm i = 0
marginal abatement cots equal to marginal damages

cap and trade across spacial differences areas and stuff
	trade based on the marginal damages 
	gotta make a differentiated trading framework
Gross external damages (GED)
	this is like gdp but for pollution
Toxic pollution
	usually stock pollutants that stay in the environment in the long term
	Local pollutants where the damages are tied where they are emitted
uncertainty in damages
	how should we deal with uncertainty in marginal damages?
	If a pollutant could be very harmful or not harmful at all, how should we think aabout managing it?
Uncertainty in marginal damages vs. Marginal Abatement costs
	are there circumstances in whihc price instruments (taxes) are preferred over quantity instruments (cap and trade)?
	Rule of thumb
		when there exists uncertainty in marginal abatement costs, then instrument should mimic marginal damage function
		In other words, a tax is appropriate if marginal damages are flat. A cap and trade program is preferred if marginal damages are steep.

Stock Pollutants
	don't decay very easily. 
	stock in t+1 equals stock at t plus emissions of t+1 minus decay
	S_t+1=S_t + E_t+1 - \alphaS_t
	S_t+1-S_t can be indicated as S dot

	Maximize Benefits-detriments of the stock 



	Current Value Hamiltonian

	H_t = Benefits of polution - detriments of stock pollutant at time + \mu_t*(E_t-\alpha*S_t)

	The marginal abatement costs need to be equal to the present value of marginal damages

Responding to climate Change
Mitigation
	reducing emmissions
Adaptation
	lessening the impact of climate change
Geo-engineering
	Offset climate effects through engineering

