#PHIL201
Annemarie Butler
email: butlera@iastate.edu
phone:515-294-4028
office; 437 Catt Hall
Office hours: 9:00-9:50am MWF or by appointmen

3 units for the class
3 books
descartes meditations on first philosophy
John Perry Dialogue concerning personal identity and mortality
Robert kane free will

Unit 1:
	Knowledge and Doubt
	last day to make up quizzes: Mon, Sept. 24
	exam 1 Wednesday, Sept. 26
	Descartes Meditations on first philosophy
Unit 2:
	Identity of persons over time
	last day to make up quizzes: Mon, Oct. 29
	Exam 2: Wed. Oct. 31 in class
	John Perry Dialogue concerning personal identity and mortality
Unit 3:
	Freedom and Alternate Possibilites
	Last day to make up quizzes Friday, December & in class
	Exam 3 Wed, Dec. 12 9:45am in the classroom


more or less daily quizzes
if you miss a quiz, ask to make it up. 

quizzes
4 points each X 25 points
exams 100 points each X3
total is 400 points
grades are determined on a 90-80-70-60% scale

Philosophy: What is it?
Axiology: the study of value
Epistemology: the study of knowledge
	greek word epistemos means knowledge (hereinmygarage.avi)
Metaphysics: "not an ology" the study of the nature of reality
	meta just means after. based on the placement of books in a library
	not astrology
Justification = a reason that succeeds in supporting a claim
when a todler keeps asking why, how do you stop them?
	ad baculum--appeal to the stick-- (beat them)
	change the subject (distract them)
	shift the burden (ask them "why not")
	insist (because I said so)
	appeal to other authorities (because mom says so)
	ENGAGE WITH THE QUESTION:
	no answer ( implies: you don't know)
	each time you provide an answer, questioner asks "why?"
The problem of justification
	1. in order for a judgement ot count as knowledge, there must be evidence to support it
	2. that evidence must be justified
	3. but that justification is new evidence, which must be justified also.
	4. and so on
	Therefore, knowledge is impossible because it requires an infinite chain of justification which is impossible to have. 
skepticisim = the view we cannot have knowledge about some (or every) doman of inquiry
The nagging todler is now known as a skeptic

Argument: one or more statements that are connected together in order toprove or make probable the truth of another statement
Premise: hte statements that provide support or evidence
conclusion: the statement that is (supposed to be) supported or proven by the premises. 
Strategies for attacking an argument:
	Show that one or more of the premises is false
	show that even if the premises were true, they would not by themselves establish the conclusion. 
Responses to the problem of justification:
	accept the argument:
		complete sketicism
	Premise #3 about arguing is wrong: the evidence doesn't necessarily need to be ""new"" 
		foundationalism: some evidence is foundational
		Coherentism: Different judgements may justify each other
The argument presupposes that the knower is able to supply the justification but all that is required is that the knower be justified
	externalism about justificaiton
		e.g., Reliabilism: so ong as the judgement is formed by a reliable process (whether or not the knower knows this), it is justified. 
Foundationalism:
	the view that any judgement that counts a knowledge is eighter:
		1. foundational
			for descartes, foundational judgements are self evident or
		2. inferred from some other judgements that counts as knowledge
	inferential judgement:
		a judgement that depends on some other judgement for its evidence and justification
	self-evident judgement:
		a judgement that provides its own evidence and justification
	Descarte's Criterion for Self eviden tknowledge:
		absolutely certain
			Same as psychological conviction?
				No, Because I could be mistaken
			indubitable (unable to be doubted)
			impossible to be mistaken
		Descarte's test to dertermine whether a judgement is not self-evident
			if there is any possible scenario in which my judgement (made on the basis of partiular evidence) would fail to meet the criterion for self-evident knowledge, then my judgement is not self-evident knowledge
		Probable: likely to happen
		possibel: could be (even if very unlikely)
			tomorrow eill be hot.
			A singkhole will swallow Pearson Hall tonight
		logical possibility: conceivable without contradiction
			Jones's biological mother has no biological children
			I hold my breath for 24 hours straight. 
			one of the above ^^ is not logicaly possible, while the other is possible. 
Is there a test that I can perform right now that would prove that I am not asleep right now?
			That is, we can fill in the folowing blank:
				No dreams could have this feature:
		Dream Argument
			right now, I am unable to determine with absolute certainty that I am not asleep.

			Therefore, a judgement is not self-evident if it depends upon my being aboslutely certain that I am not asleep when making it. 
	Appearance vs. Reality
	Different types of judgements;
		sensory judgements: format: judgement, evidence
			I judge that there really exists a hand, 
			simply because it appears to my senses that there is a hand
			
			Not foundational because they are all based in sensory knowledge
		Judgements from Testimony:
			I judge that there is a quiz today, simply because the agenda says that there is a quiz today


	If you are feeling saucy and precocious
	Judgements about thoughts:
		I judge that it realy appears to me that there is a hand, simply because it appears to me that ther ies a hand.
	judgements from reasoning
		I jduge that 1=1 simply because I reason that 1=1
		I judge that other math simply because I reason that {other resoning steps}
Evil Demon Argument
	Right now is there any feature of my experience that hsows that it is not a demon-induced hallucination?
		Right now, I am unable to determine with absolute certainty that my thoughts are not being manipulated by an evil demon
		therefore, a judgement is not self-evident if it depends upon my being absolutely certain that my thoughts are not being manipulated by an evil demon when making the judgement

	a priori knowledge
		can be known simply by reasoning about the concepts involved in the judgment
	a posteriori knowledge
		cannot be known simply by reasoning about the concepts involved in the judgement; the knowledge requires experience or observation.

	Argument brought up by the evil demon argument:
		the evil demon argument reveals that every a posteriori judgement is not self-evident
			counterexample: "I am thining"
		point: the evil demon argument does not neatly separate a priori and a posteriori judgements

		the evil demon argument reveals thate every a priori judgement may be self-evident
			counterexample "complex reasoning"
Cogito (ergo sum)
	I am thinking therefore I exist
Cogito
	why must this be in the first person?
	What is so special about thinking
	when do I know myself to exist
	Why "i am thinking now" not "I often think"
	Couldn't i be a figment of the demon's imagination?
vocab: mental-physical dualism
	Mind: the thing that thinks
	brain: the physical object located in the skull
	Mental-physical dualism
		the view that there exist two mutually exclusive categories of things: mental things and physical things
	materialism
		the view that everything exisis is physical (is a body or physical property of a body)
	immaterialism
		The view that everything that exists is mental
	
	How can something that is physical cause changes to something that is thinking and vice versa?
		descartes solution
			a person's mind and body interact at the base of the skull at the pineal gland
	The knowledge argument
		1. I know that I exist (cogito)
		2. I do not know that any bodies exit (dream argument, evil demon argument)
		3. Indiscernibility of Identicals (if one thing has a property that another thing lacks, then they aren't the same thing)
		therefore I am not a bodily thing. (I am a mind.)
Why can't Descartes use "physical" and "not physical" to contrast bodies and minds
	or use "thinking and "not thinking"
		that's what he's trying to do to come up with it, so he can't use that to prove it. 

		1. I do not know whether bodies exist
		2. I know that bodies to not exist
			different sentences. 
			ignorance doesn't disprove the existence of things

		I hat the ames murderer
		I do not hate my neighbor
		indiscernibility of identicals
			therefore the ames serial murderer is not my neighbor

		objection 1: the knowledge argument does not establish descarte's intended conclusion

		the argument does not prove that the names "ames serial murderer' and 'my neighbor' do not refer to the same thing

		analogously:
		the knowledge argument does not prove that "mind" refers to something that is not "body"

		objection 2: Misapplication of principle
			the indiscernibility of identicals requires properties that objects have on their own, not properties that depend on their relationship to something else (intrinsic vs extrinsic)

		Descarte's wax example
		senses provide particular ideas from actual sensations
		imagination combines together articular ideas form the senses to form other particular ideas
		intellect is able to conceive of generalities without being constrained by particular features

	solipsism = the vew ithat only I exist
	solipsism of righ tnow = the veiew that only I exist for only as longa st this moment exists
The cogito proves that I exist right now, because I am thinking right now
the cogito does not prove that the current I is the same as pst I's 
if D cannont prove that I am the same at different times, then i exist only right now
but he isn't a solipsist. he doesn't know if other things exist, not that he knows other things don't exist
The act of making a judgement requires pulling different ideas together.
one and the same mind first possesses the different ideas and then brings them together into a judgement
so minds are capable of existing longer than their particular ideas


Point of D's Wax example
senses provide particular dieas fro mactual sensations
imagination combines together particular idesas ffrom the senses to form other particular ideas
but we do have general ideas too. From where?intellect is able to conceive of generalities without being constrained by particular features

Acquired ideas: Ideas that are obtained form a source outside of my mind
invented ideas: ideas that I ahve created by combining ideas
Innate ideas Ideas that my mind has at its creation

continuum between more reality and less reality with infinite things on the side of more reality, finite things in the middle, and thoughts and physical properties on the side of less reality. 

Descarte's proof of god's existence

I have a clear and distinct idea of an absolutely perfect being
I cannot be the cause of that idea because the idea contians more reality than I or non-gods do. 
Therefore this absolutely perfect being exists and causes my ideea of it 

Perfection= lacking nothing; self-sufficient. 

Objection to premise one (i have a clear and distinct idea of an absolutely perfect being)
How can a finite mind have a clear and distinct idea of something infinite?

Descarte's reply: the idea is adequate enough to grasp it that it represents more than something finite

objection: Then it's not a clear and distinct idea

Objection to premise 2 
I could have invented the idea of god from combining together various augmented ideas:
	wisdom, power, goodness, etc
		descartes: replies
			this invented idea would fail to represent god's simplicity since it is composed of many different ideas
			We can create an idea of indefinitude but that is not infinity
	Why God is not a deceiver
	1. God does not lack anything
	2. A being deceives or manipulates when it lacks something
	therfore, god doesn't deceive

	Why does descartes need to show that God does not deceive

============THE NEXT SECTION==========
two characters
	sam miller - chaplain
	gretchen weirob - philosopher
	Dave Cohen - student
W's Challenge = provide an account ofpersonal identity that makes survival possible

Personal Identity = the criteria that must be met in order for something to count as one and the same person at different times.
survival = one and the same person continues to have experiences after bodily death

-why would being remembered by others after bodily death guarantee survival?

possible = conceivable 
=/= reasonable probablility
=/= consistent witht known laws of science
=/= technologically feasible

Numerical identity = one and the same thing
qualitative identity = the same kind of thing

is the pair numerically identical:

(1) Dylan Sprouse and
(2) Cole Sprouse
NO there's two of them

(1) Dylan Sprouse and
(2) Cole Sprouse's twin brother
Yes they are two names for the same thing


1 the criteria for personal identity are logically inconsistent
	-for instance, the criteria might indicat that different people are the same
	-or the criteria might be contradictory
2. the criteria for personal identity are not ocnsistent with tht epossibility of survival
	-the criteria won't help miller meet weirob's challenge. 

Miller's Theory o fPersonal Identity(First Night):
	to be one and the same person at different times is to have the same soul

1. we know facts about the identity of persons at different times.
2. we do not know facts about the idenity of souls at different times
3. indiscernibility of identicals
therefore, person =/= soul

Freaky friday
	Is the person with the motherly thoughts before the switch the same as the person with motherly body after?
	would miller say that in the freaky friday scenario that the person has switched bodies?
		prolly not
	Would Weirob say that in the freaky friday scenario, the person has switched bodies?
		probably, but that begs the question

	Beg the question to assume the conclusion as evidence for the conclusion

Weirob's Overall objection
	1. we know the identity of persons at different times
	2. We do not know the identity of souls at different times
	3. Indiscernibility of identicals
	therefore, person is not soul

Weirob's overall objection
	M's reply to W's Overall Objection:
		we do know the identity of souls
		i) Sameness of body is evidence for sameness of soul
			isn't i just weirob's view?

if i is known, it is either known a priori or known a posteriori
2. M does not know i a priori:
	there is no conceptual connection between having the same body and having the same soul
3. M does not know a posteriori
	we never experience the conjnctino of bodies and souls

Miller's overall objection
	1. we know the identity of persons at different times.
	2. we do not know the identity of souls at different times
	3. indiscernibility of identicals
	therefroe, persons are not souls

Soul flow:
	A stream of different souls flows throught he same body giving rise to the appearance of a continuous personality
		cartesian epistemic principle
			knowing something requires that it be impossible to be mistaken about it
Weirob's soul flow objection
	1. cartesian epistemic principle
	2. if soul flow were to happen, miller owuld be mistaken to judge (from continuity of personality) that there is one same soul
	therefore milller does not know that continutiy of personality is evidence for sameness of soul. 

Weirob's theory of personal identity:
	to be the same pers is to have the same body as determined by a continuous bodily appearance
body flow:
	a stream of different bodies successively replace each other in continuous places and times giving rise to a continuous bodily appearance
our body flow objection against weirob
	1. the cartesian epistemec principle
	2. if body flow were to happen, weirob would be mistaken to judge that there is one and the same body
	therefore, weirob does not know that continuity of bodily appearance is evidence for numerical sameness of body
dilemma for weirob's overall objection:
	either both flow arguments work or they both fail

if soul flow and body flow both work,
	miller and weirob do not know the identity of numerical identity of bodies or souls over time
		premise #1 of weirob's overlal objection is wrong
if soul flow and body flow both fail
	miller and weirob do know the numerial identity of bodies and souls over time
		premise #3 of weirob's overall objection is wrong
Epistemological or Metaphysical claim?
	Metaphysical-miller: to be the same person is to have the same soul
	methaphysical-weirob:To be he same person is to have the same body
	epistemological-weirob: I know th identities of persons
	metaphysical-Miller: on earth, a person has both a body and a soul
	epistomological-Weirob: Miller doesn't know a priori that somethging or another
	epistimology-Miller: Continuity of personality is evidence for sameness of soul

Personal Identity = the criteria that must be met in order for something to be the numerically same person at different times
=what constitutes being the numerically same person

Wierob's overall objection asked Miller to offer criteria to use to know 9decide, tell, tetermine) whether something is the numerically the same person at different times

=how do we Know whether it is the numerically same person?

something something baseball
	different aspects of the game can change, but the baseball game is still the same
	the sequence of plays that follow the rules of basebal constitute a baseball game
M's Four-Dimensional View of Persons:
	a person is a collection of all and only the relevant person-stages
	a person-stage is a stretch of consciousness that exists at a particular time.
	
	One person-stage is not numerically the same as another even if the content of the thought is the same

	How do two person-stages differ from each other?
	what about the soul?

M's 4d view:
	two consecutive person-stages are part of the same person:
		the later person-stage inherits some memory from the earlier person-stage

		Why not require that every memory is inherited?
		Must it be the same memory that is inherited each time?
		
		What if, at some later point in life, I do not remember an event from my childhoot?
		Am I no longer the same person?
		What problems can you think of that memory raises?

Reductio ad absurdum
	a valid argument form that begins with an assumption that leads to a contradiciton or absurdity. this contradiciton shows that the initial assumption was false

	To object to a reduction:
		show that one or more of the non-assumption premises is false
		show that the contradiction or absurdity is not really contradictory or absurd
Weirob's 1st duplication argument
	1. Suppose that M's 4d theory of personal identity and survival are correct
	2. if God can create heavenly person-stages once, god can do it more than once simultaneously
	3. if that were to happen, each simultaneous person-stage meets M's critera for numerically the same person
	4. but there are multiple person-stages existing simultaneously, not just one. 

	Therefore there is an inconsistency in M's 4d theory of personal identity and survival
C's Rep. Additional criterion: "no competition"
	numerically the same person requires that there be no simultaneous competing person-stages

	if more than one simultaneous person-stage gets "yes" to all three questions:
		then none of the simultaneous person-stages counts as part of the person

	if Just one Person-stage at a time gets "yes" to all three questions:
		then it counts as part of the person
	ad hoc ("to this") = improvised to handle this specific problem, not because of some general principle

Suppose that M and C's theory is right.
Duplication scenario:
Suppose that God creates a new eartyly person-stage now (F) in addition to the naturally occuring one (G) and transfers some actual memory to it from W's preceding person-stage (H).

The "Fetus Problem"
	1. According to psychological theories of personal identity, in order to be the numerically same person, there must be continuity of psychological states.
	2. Fetuses' brains are insufficiently developed to supportpsychological states.
	3. Therefore, according to psychological theories of personal identity, it is false to say that I was once a fetus
	4. But I was once a fetus.
	Therefore, psychological theories of personal identity are wrong
A 4D theory for Weirob:
	the numerically same person is
		a collection of all and only those bodily stagees that are connected together continuously in space and time

Julia North = brain donor
Mary Frances Beaudine = body donor
	according to miller: who survives the operation? Julia North
	are the memories of the survivor actual memories?

	according to weirob: who survives the operation? Mary Frances Beaudine
	are the memories of the usrvivor actual memories?

	Objection to weirob's vies: makes actual memory depend on factors extrinsic to the memories or the brain

	Weirob's view calls this a "brain transplant"

	this could also be described as a body transplant

C's new view: conventionalism

conventionalism = 
	the view that there is no deep fact about whether someoene is the numerically same person; it's just a social convention

Weirob's objection aspirin example
	1. suppose that conventionalism is correct
	2. According to conventionalism, the identity of the person with the post-surgery headache would change if the convention changes
	3. there is an unchanging fact about who has the post-surgery headache
	Therefore, conventionalism is not correct

M and C urge weirob to have her brain implanted into someone else's body
M and C view: actual memory is had by the numerically same original brain that was at the remembered event

M and C's claimed advantages for theeir psychological theory of personal identity
	1. makes sense of my correct judgement of my own identity without knowledge of my body
	2. psychological criteria for identiy pick out what is valuable about a person.

M and C view: actual memory is had by the numerically same original brain that was at the remembered event
M and C's claimed advantages for their psychological theory of personal identity
	1. makes sense of my correct judgement of my own identity without knowledge of my body
	2. Psychological criteria for identity picks out what is valuable about a person
	
	if they create a duplicate brain, they'll think they're the og person
A 4D theory for Weirob:
the numerically same person is
	a collection of all and only those bodily stages that are connected together continuously in space and time
A materialist teory of survival
	Just before the time of bodily death, God quickly removes the body (preservingin ti ino rder to revive at some later time in heaven) and replaces it with an exact duplicate on earth

	Is this possible?
	For Weirob, does the duplicate body belong to the numerically same person?
	For Weirob, does the revivedd body belogng to the numerically same person?
	
	Does the preserved body still belong to the numerically same person even while the body has no conscious thoughts?
The views we have considered:
	Miller's soul view
	Miller's 4D psychological view:
		some actual memory connects person-stages
		Cohen's 'no competition' clause
		the numerically same brain is required
	Weirob's 4D bodily view
	Cohen's conventionalism
which views require that souls exist?
... that numerically the same brain exists?

Which views hold that identity is a matter of degree
Which views hold that identity is all or nothing

which views might recommend teleportation as a speedy way to travel?(do we need more information?)
Which views might recommend cloning as a way to extend one's own lifetime? does it make a difference if the clone exists later or at the same time as the origininal
